# Workshop 07: Working with programs and pdas

in this workshop we will have some practice working with different kinds of programs (smart contracts), and getting used to the fact that all the action on solana happens by invoking instructions of a specific program. students will not be required to write their own programs here, but get to know how they function by constructing instructions for them and inspecting how those instructions execute on chain. we will probably use some programs from **SPL (Solana program library)** as well as come up with our own programs for educational purposes.

also in previous section we learnt how to use instructions generated by methods of `SystemProgram` class from `@solana/web3.js` library, that's some kind of an abstraction layer. in this workshop we are not going to use any helper methods for generating instructions.

## 1) Interacting with the memo program

* the [memo program](https://spl.solana.com/memo) is the simplest one in SPL. it helps us to add a note or some associated id to our transaction logs.
* this challenge will follow through this tutorial: [Memo Program | Quicknode](https://www.quicknode.com/guides/solana-development/getting-started/how-to-use-the-solana-memo-program/)

## 2) Interacting with Shared memory Program

* [Shared Memory Program](https://spl.solana.com/shared-memory) is `a simple program and highly optimized program that writes instruction data into the provided account's data` you can store any kind of data on this programs accounts.
* On the seminar we will highlight how this actually works on a blockchain and how program accounts are managed on a higher level.
* also students will have to write construct transactions that interact with the program and write provided buffer to an account. we will have to write account deserializers to read from the accounts aswell.

## 3) Storing and retrieving arbitrary data with Config Program

* config program has only one instruction, the `store` instruction, any type of data can be stored using this instruction, students will construct a simple key-value store using this program. they will have the liberty of coming up with a clever way to serialize the data they are going to store. we will cover the concept of serialization, and it's origination briefly on workshop or in lectures.
* [Config Program](https://docs.solana.com/developing/runtime-facilities/programs#config-program)
* [Instructions](https://docs.rs/solana-config-program/1.15.2/solana\_config\_program/config\_instruction/index.html)

## 4) TODO come up with a program to include here

* something similar but conceptually different :d
